federalist 74
the command of the military and naval
forces and the pardoning power of the
executive from the new york packet
tuesday march 25th 1788
hamilton
to the people of the state of new york
the president of the united states is to
be commander-in-chief of the army and
navy of the united states and of the
militia of the several states when
called into the actual service of the
united states
the propriety of this provision is so
evident in itself and it is at the same
time so consonant to the precedence of
the state constitutions in general that
little need be said to explain or
enforce it
even those of them which have in other
respects couple the chief magistrate
with a council have for the most part
concentrated the military authority in
him alone of all the cares or concerns
of government the direction of war most
peculiarly demands those qualities which
distinguish the exercise of power by a
single hand
the direction of war implies the
direction of the common strength and the
power of directing and employing the
common strength forms a usual and
essential part in the definition of the
executive authority
the president may require the opinion in
writing of the principal officer in each
of the executive departments upon any
subject relating to the duties of their
respective officers
this i consider as a mere redundancy in
the plan as the right for which it
provides would result of itself from the
office
he is also to be authorized to grant
reprieves and pardons for offenses
against the united states accepting
cases of impeachment humanity and good
policy conspired to dictate that the
benign prerogative of pardoning should
be as little as possible fettered or
embarrassed the criminal code of every
country partakes so much of necessary
severity that without an easy access to
exceptions in favor of unfortunate guilt
justice would wear a countenance too
sanguinary and cruel
as the sense of responsibility is always
strongest in proportion as it is
undivided it may be inferred that a
single man would be most ready to attend
to the force of those motives which
might plead for a mitigation of the
rigor of the law at least app to yield
to considerations which were calculated
to shelter a fit object of its vengeance
the reflection that the fate of a fellow
creature depended on his soul fiat would
naturally inspire scrupulousness and
caution the dread of being accused of
weakness or connivance would be get
equal circumspection though of a
different kind
on the other hand as men generally
derive confidence from their numbers
they might often encourage each other in
an active operacy and might be less
sensible to the apprehension of
suspicion or censure for an injudicious
or affected clemency on these accounts
one man appears to be a more eligible
dispenser of the mercy of government
than a body of men
the expediency of vesting the power of
pardoning in the president has if i
mistake not been only contested in
relation to the crime of treason this it
has been urged ought to have depended
upon the ascent of one or both of the
branches of the legislative body
i shall not deny that there are strong
reasons to be assigned for requiring in
this particular the concurrence of that
body or of a part of it as treason is a
crime level that the immediate being of
the society when the laws have once
ascertained the guilt of the offender
there seems a fitness in referring the
expediency of an act of mercy towards
him to the judgment of the legislature
and this ought to rather to be the case
as the supposition of the connivance of
the chief magistrate ought not to be
entirely excluded but there are also
strong objections to such a plan
it is not to be doubted that a single
man of prudence and good sense is better
fitted in delicate conjunctures to
balance the motives which may plead for
and against the remission of the
punishment than any numerous body
whatever
it deserves particular attention that
treason will often be connected with
seditions which embrace a large
proportion of the community as lately
happened in massachusetts
in every such case we might expect to
see the representation of the people
tainted with the same spirit which had
given birth to the offense and when
parties were pretty equally matched the
secret sympathy of the friends and
favors of the condemned person availing
itself of the good nature and weakness
of others might frequently bestow
impunity where the terror of an example
was necessary on the other hand when the
sedition had proceeded from causes which
had inflamed the resentments of the
major party they might often be found
obstinate and inexorable when policy
demanded a conduct of forbearance and
clemency but the principal argument for
reposing the power of pardoning in this
case to the chief magistrate is this in
seasons of insurrection or rebellion
there are often critical moments when a
well-timed offer of pardon to the
insurgents or rebels may restore the
tranquility of the commonwealth and
which if suffered to pass unimproved it
may never be possible afterwards to
recall
the dilatory process of convening the
legislature or one of its branches for
the purpose of obtaining its sanction to
the measure would frequently be the
occasion of letting slip the golden
opportunity
the loss of a week a day an hour may
sometimes be fatal
if it should be observed that a
discretionary power with a view to such
contingencies might be occasionally
conferred upon the president it may be
answered in the first place that it is
questionable whether in a limited
constitution that power could be
delegated by law and in the second place
that it would generally be impolitic
beforehand to take any step which might
hold out the prospect of impunity
a proceeding of this kind out of the
usual course would be likely to be
construed into an argument of timidity
or of weakness and would have a tendency
to embolden guilt
publius